Monica sat with her face buried in her hands, her whole frame quivering
with emotion. Those last words of her husband’s smote her almost like
a blow. She deserved them, no doubt; yet they were cruel, coming like
that. He could not have spoken so if he loved her. He would not stand
coldly aloof whilst she suffered, if he held her really dear. And yet,
once he had almost seemed to love her, till she had alienated him by
her pride and self-will. It was just, she admitted, yet, oh! it was
very hard!

She sat, crushed and confounded, for a time, and it was only by a great
effort that she spoke at all.

“I did not know, Randolph; I did not know. You should have told me
before.”

“I believed you did know. You told me that you did.”

“Not that. Did you think I could know _that_ and treat him as a friend?
Oh, Randolph! how could you? You ought to have told me before.”

“Perhaps I ought,” he said. “But remember, Monica, I spoke out very
plainly, and still you insisted that he was, and should continue to be,
your friend—your repentant friend.”

Monica raised her eyes to her husband’s face, full of a sort of mute
reproach. She felt that she merited the rebuke—that he might have
said much more without being really harsh—and yet it was very hard, in
this hour of their re-union, to have to hear, from lips that had never
uttered till then anything but words of gentleness and love, these
reproofs and strictures on her conduct. She saw that he was moved: that
there was a repressed agitation and excitement in his whole manner;
but she could not guess how deeply he had been roused and stirred
by the careless jests he had heard passed that day, nor how burning
an indignation he felt towards the man who had plotted to ruin his
happiness.

“You should not have left me, Randolph,” said Monica, “if you could not
trust me.”

He went up to her quietly, and took her hands. She stood up, looking
straight into his eyes.

“I did trust you—I do trust you,” he answered, with subdued
impetuosity. “Can I look into your face and harbour one doubt of your
goodness and truth? I trust _you_ implicitly; it is your judgment, not
your heart, that has been at fault.”

She looked up gratefully, and drew one step nearer.

“And now that you have come back, all will be right again,” she said.
“Randolph, I will never speak to that man again.”

His face was stern; it wore a look she did not understand.

“I am not sure of that,” he answered, speaking with peculiar
incisiveness. “It may be best that you _should_ speak to him again.”

She looked up, bewildered.

“Randolph, why do you say that? Do you think that, after all, he has
repented?”

Randolph’s face expressed an unutterable scorn. She read the meaning of
that glance, and answered it as if it had been expressed in words.

“Randolph, do you believe for a moment that I would permit any one to
speak ill of you to me? Am I not your wife?”

His face softened as he looked at her, but there was a good deal of
sadness there, too.

“I do not believe you would deliberately listen to such words from him;
but are not poisoned shafts launched sometimes that strike home and
rankle? Has no one ever come between you and me, since the day you
gave yourself to me in marriage?”

He saw her hesitation, and a great sadness came into his eyes. How near
she was and yet how far! His heart ached for her in her loneliness and
isolation, and it ached for himself too.

Monica broke the silence first.

“Randolph,” she said timidly; “no harm has been done to you, really? He
cannot hurt you; can he?”

His face was stern as he answered her.

“He will hurt me if he can—through my wife. His threat is still
unfulfilled; but he knows where to plant a blow, how to strike in the
dark. Yes, Monica, he has hurt me.”

She drew back a pace.

“How?”

“It hurts me to know that idle gossip connects my wife’s name with
his—that he has the credit of being a lover, discarded only from
motives of policy. I know that there is not a syllable of truth in
these reports—that they have been set afloat by his malicious tongue.
Nevertheless, they hurt me. They hurt me the more because my wife has
given some countenance to such rumours, by permitting a certain amount
of intimacy with a man whom her husband will not receive.”

Monica was white to the lips. She understood now, as she had never
done before, what Cecilia Bellamy had meant by her flighty speeches a
few hours before. They had disgusted and offended her then, now they
appeared like absolute insults. Randolph saw the stricken look upon her
face, and knew that she was cut to the quick.

“Monica,” he said, more gently, “what has been done can be undone by a
little patience and self-control. We need not be afraid of a man like
Sir Conrad. I have known him and his ways long. He has tried before to
injure me without success. He has tried in a more subtle way this time;
yet again I say, most emphatically, that he has failed.”

But Monica hardly heard. She was torn by the tumult of her shame and
distress.

“Randolph!” she exclaimed, stretching out her hands towards him:
“Randolph, take me home! oh! take me home, out of this cruel, cruel,
wicked world! I cannot live here. It kills me; it stifles the very life
out of me! I am so miserable, so desolate here! It is all so hard, and
so terrible! Take me home! Ah! I was happy once!”

“I will take you to Trevlyn, Monica, believe me, as soon as ever I can;
but it cannot be just yet. Shall I tell you why?”

She recoiled from him once more, putting up her hand with that
instinctive gesture of distress.

“You are very cruel to me Randolph,” she said, with the sharpness of
keen misery in her voice.

He stood quite still, looking at her, and then continued in the same
quiet way:

“Shall I tell you why? I cannot take you away until we have been seen
together as before. I shall go with you to some of those houses you
have visited without me. We must be seen riding and driving, and going
about as if nothing whatever had occurred during my absence. If we meet
Fitzgerald, there must be nothing in your manner or in mine to indicate
that he is otherwise than absolutely indifferent to us. I dare say he
will put himself in your way. He would like to force upon me the part
of the jealous, distrustful husband, but it is a _rôle_ I decline to
play at his bidding. I am not jealous, nor am I distrustful, and he
and all the world shall see that this is so. If I take you away now,
Monica, I shall give occasion for people to say that I am afraid to
trust my wife in any place where she may meet Fitzgerald. Let us stay
where we are, and ignore the foolish rumours he has circulated, and we
shall soon see them drop into deserved oblivion.”

“Randolph, I cannot! I cannot!” cried Monica, who was now overwrought
and agitated to the verge of exhaustion; “I _cannot_ stay here. I
cannot go amongst those who have dared to say such things, to believe
such things of me. What does it matter what they think, when we are far
away? Take me back to Trevlyn, and let us forget it all. Let me go, if
only for a week. I have never asked you anything before. Oh! Randolph,
do not be so hard! Say that you will take me home!”

“If I loved you less, Monica,” he answered, in a very low, gentle tone,
“I should say yes. As it is, I say no. I cannot take you to Trevlyn
yet.”

She turned away then, and left him without a word, passing slowly
through the brilliantly-lighted room, and up the wide staircase.
Randolph sat down and rested his head upon his hand, and a long-drawn
sigh rose up from the very depths of his heart. This interview had
tried him quite as much as it had done Monica—possibly even more.

“Perhaps, after all, Fitzgerald _has_ revenged himself,” he muttered,
“though not in a way he anticipated. Ah, Monica! my fair young wife,
why cannot you trust me a little more?”

Monica trusted him far more than he knew. It was not in anger that
she had left him. In the depth of her heart she believed that he had
judged wisely and well; it was only the wave of home-sickness sweeping
over her that had urged her to such passionate pleading. And then
his strong, inflexible firmness gave her a curious sense of rest and
confidence. She herself was so torn and rent by conflicting emotions,
by bewilderment and uncertainty, that his resolute determination
and singleness of purpose were as a rock and tower of defence. She
had called him cruel in the keen disappointment of the moment, but
she knew he was not really so. Home-sick, aching for Trevlyn as she
was—irrepressibly as she shrank from the idea of facing those to whom
she had given cause to say that she did not love her husband, she felt
that his decision was right. It might be hard, but it was necessary,
and she would go through her part unflinchingly for his sake. It was
the least that she could do to make amends for the unconscious wrong
she had done him.

She felt humbled to the very dust, utterly distrustful of herself, and
quite unworthy of the gentleness and forbearance her husband showed
towards her. How much he must be disappointed in her! How hard he must
feel it to have married her out of kindness, and to be treated thus!

She was very quiet and submissive during the days that followed, doing
everything he suggested, studying in all things to please him, and to
make up for the past. In society she was more bright and less silent
than she had been heretofore. She was determined not to appear unhappy.
No one should in future have cause to say that her present life was not
congenial to her. Certainly, if anyone took the trouble to watch her
now, it would easily be seen that she was no longer indifferent to her
husband. Her eyes often followed him about when he was absent from her
side. She always seemed to know where he was, and to turn to him with a
sort of instinctive welcome when he came back to her. This clinging to
him was quite unconscious, the natural result of her confidence in his
strength and protecting care; but it was visible to one pair of keenly
jealous eyes, and Conrad Fitzgerald, when he occasionally found himself
in company with Randolph and his wife, watched with a sense of baffled
malevolence the failure of his carefully-planned scheme.

People began to talk now of the devotion of Mr. Trevlyn and Lady Monica
with as much readiness and carelessness as they had done about their
visible estrangement. It takes very little to set idle tongues wagging,
and every one admired the bride and liked the bridegroom, so that the
good opinion of the world was not difficult to regain.

But Monica’s peace of mind was less easily recovered. At home she
was grave and sad, and he thought her cold; and the full and entire
reconciliation—of which, indeed, at that time she would have felt quite
unworthy—was not to be yet. Each was conscious of deep love on his or
her own side, but could not read the heart of the other, and feared to
break the existing calm by any attempt to ruffle the surface of the
waters.

They were not very much alone, for Lord Haddon and his sister spent
many evenings with them when they were not otherwise engaged, and the
intimacy between the two houses increased rapidly.

Monica had never again alluded to the prospective return to Trevlyn—the
half-promise made by Randolph to take her back soon. She did not know
what “soon” might mean, and she did not ask. She had grown content now
to leave that question in his hands.

Once, when in the after-dinner twilight, she had been talking to
Beatrice of her old home, the latter said, with eager vehemence:

“How you must long to see it again! How you must ache to be out of this
tumult, and back with your beloved sea and cliffs and pine-woods! Don’t
you hate our noisy, busy London? Don’t you pine to go back?”

Monica was silent, pondering, as it seemed. She was thinking deeply.
When she answered out of the fulness of her heart, her words startled
even herself.

“I don’t think I do. I missed the quiet and rest at first, but, you
see, my husband is here; I do not pine when I have him.”

Beatrice’s eyes grew suddenly wistful. “Ah, no!” she answered. “I can
understand that.”

But after a long silence she rallied herself and asked:

“But is he not going to take you back? Do you not want to see your
father and brother again?”

“Yes, if Randolph is willing to take me; but it must be as he likes.”

“He will like what will please you best.”

Monica smiled a little.

“No; he will like what is best, and I shall like it too.”

Beatrice studied her face intently.

“Do you know, Monica, that you have changed since I saw you first?”

Monica passed her hand across her brow. What a long time it seemed
since that first meeting in the park!

“Have I?”

“Yes. Do you know I used to have a silly fancy that you did not much
care for Randolph? It was absurd and impertinent, I know; but Haddon
had brought such a strange account of your sudden wedding, called you
the ‘snow bride,’ and had somehow got an idea that it had all been
rather cold and sad—forgetting, of course, that the sadness was on
account of your father’s health. I suppose I got a preconceived idea;
and do you know, when first I knew you I used to think of you as
the ‘snow-bride,’ and fancy you very cold to everyone—especially to
Randolph; and now that I see more of you and know you better, it is
just as plain that you love him with all your heart and soul.”

Monica sat quite still in the darkness, turning about the ring upon
her finger—the pledge of his wedded love. She was startled at hearing
put into plain words the secret thought treasured deep down in her
heart, but seldom looked into or analysed. Had it come to that? Did she
indeed love him thus? Was that the reason she yielded up herself and
her future so trustfully and willingly to him?—the reason that she no
longer yearned after Trevlyn as home, so long as he was at her side?
Yes, that was surely it. Beatrice had spoken no more than the truth
in what she said. She did love her husband heart and soul; but did he
love her too? There lay the sting—she had proved unworthy of him: he
must know it and feel it. She had been near to winning his heart; but
alas! she had not won it—and now, now perhaps it was too late. And yet
the full truth was like a ray of sunshine in her heart. Might she not
yet win his love by the depth and tenderness of her own? Something deep
down within her said that the land of promise lay, after all, not so
very far away.
